---
title: ARAVIDEN
date: 2022-04-20T08:59:34.865Z
draft: false
featured: false
authors:
  - MarieJarrell
  - EtiennePeillard
tags:
  - Avatar
image:
  filename: ""
  focal_point: Smart
  preview_only: false
---
This	project	aims	to	explore Augmented	Reality	(AR) user	
identification	with	AR	virtual	avatars from	a	human	centered	
perspective. Identification	is	a	psychological	phenomenon	
representing	the	merger	of	user	and	avatar which	forms	a	new	
identity.	Normally	AR	identification	research	is	limited	to the	
mechanics	of	a	system and	improving	immersion.	This	project will	
instead	focus	on	the unique psychological	experiences AR
identification produces.	In AR	when	there	is	a	user	x	avatar	
interaction the	real	and	virtual	worlds	are	co-present.	The	avatar	is	
not	a	stand-in	for	the	user	in	a	virtual	space	as	in	fully	immersive	VR.	
Instead	the	user’s	body	is	either	augmented	with	virtual	elements	or	
a	virtual	avatar	is	placed in	the	same	real	world	environment	as	the	
user.	The	avatar	and	user inhabit	the	same	space	at	the	same	time
and	the	user	is	asked	to	identify	with	the	avatar	while	being	fully	
aware	of	their	own body.	This	project	aims	to	explore	AR	
identification	and dual-presence	for	systems	that	augment	and	
replace	users; as	well	as, how	AR	identification	might	affect	users’
attitudes	and	behaviors.	Past	research	has	shown	that	identification	
with	VR and	video	game avatars can do	such	things	as;	 improve	
users’	cognitive	abilities,	change	users'	self-perceptions,	and	reduce	
users’	societal	biases	. As	AR	avatar	identification	requires	users	to	be	
aware	of	themselves	and	the	avatar	at	the	same	time	it’s	possible	
these	effects	could	manifest	in	drastically	differently.	Thus,	this	
project	aims	to	improve	our	understanding of	the psychological	
impacts of	AR	identification. Since,	VR	and	video	game	identification	
have	been	found	to	have	such	varied	significant	effects	on	users,
understanding	AR	identification	could	not	only	improve	the
technology	but	help	researchers	and	developers	promote multiple	
positive	changes	in	society. 